---
title: On the Dogu Express
author: Dan Vonk
tags: personal, travel
---

![Turkish railways train stopped beside the platform](/images/DSCF7010.JPG "The Dogu Express reaches its penultimate stop, leaving enough time to buy and drink a quick Turkish coffee on the platform.")

In November of 2022, I headed to Ankara for a two-week adventure through Turkey
and the Caucuses with a friend that I have known for many years. It had been a
trip months in the making, though it started with a humble suggestion during a
Discord chat one evening. Both being relatively early into our careers, we did
not have the luxury of spending money on long-haul flights to the U.S., a week's
worth of hotels in an expensive state as well as the petrol needed to get us
around. Nor did the idea of staying in Europe and going to museums sound all
that excited to us adventure-seekers. So instead, it was more a question of how
far we could go for the least money and luckily, through browsing on Google
Flights, we found short-haul flights to Ankara that fit the description well. So
our destination had now become Ankara. But ask any Turk and they will tell you
that there isn't much to see in this city. Therefore, we decided to take the
night train across the country and continue this journey into the Caucuses,
which I'll probably describe in a further blog post.

When we arrived in Ankara, far from being boring, the city was initially
exciting to be in: Even for someone who had grown up around London, it seemed
huge. I think this was due to the hilly geography of the city, where the horizon
was filled with craggy hills in all directions, which were densely packed with
grey, concrete tenement blocks, all identically dishevelled, with their walls
reflecting the yellow sodium-vapour lighting that is steadily becoming antique
elsewhere. Our hotel was perched midway up the hill in the old town area of
Ankara and the during the night, the views from it looked like someone had taken
the city-scape of Los Angeles, as seen from the hills around the Hollywood sign,
scrunched it up into a ball and it all creased, unfurled it as a sky-box around
our hotel room.

The streets themselves were packed with people running their errands. On street
corners, men would setup shop with a picnic table and chair, flogging lottery
tickets while people waited for the pedestrian traffic light to turn green.
Likewise, just in case you were starting to feel hungry, you were never far from
someone selling (perhaps not so) freshly baked Simit bread, which cost 5 or so
lira per piece. There were also many alleyways that turned into bazaars, where
one could buy the usual counterfeit junk but also a huge variety of spices and
kitchenware such as teapots, so indispensable in Turkey.

But what we found interesting is that this frenetic atmosphere was not
all-encompassing. Around almost every corner, there were kebab restaurants which
were exactly like the ones back in Germany (not comparable to those grotty ones
you find in England, whose purpose is to supply greasy food to inebriates at 4
AM), where old blokes would spend hours talking and smoking. We also tried it,
minus the smoking, and found it agreeable. Plus the food was always delicious.

However, after a while we were ready to leave the chaos of this 'boring city'.
In the months before the trip, we stumbled upon, through research on the
internet in the months preceding the trip, the _Dogu Express_. This passenger
train runs every night from Ankara in the centre of the country, to Kars, which
is in the far east, in the Armenian highlands. Despite its name, the train takes
around thirty hours to reach its destination from Ankara. You may think this
means it traverses some colossal distance, but in fact it would only take 13
hours to drive. However, the slowness of the train did not deter us as we had
plenty of time and I was rather looking forward to sleeping on a night train,
which I had never done before.

![Rolling golden hills in the twilight sun](/images/DSCF6948.JPG "Fist views of
the countryside after departing from Ankara Station")

Although the website for the Turkish railway company was clunky, it wasn't too
difficult to book tickets a week or so before we left for the trip. We decided
to be cheeky and book two extra fake guests in the same cabin as us so that we
didn't have worry about being cramped in the cabin with two strangers. We didn't
feel too bad as this was the off-season and there were plenty of other berths
available. In all, it cost us about £15 each, making this a very cheap way to
get across the country. If you wanted it even cheaper, you could also get
couchettes. However, we walked through that carriage and found it musty, hot and
humid.

It is also considered sinful in Islam for an unmarried man and woman (including
strangers) to sit next to each other, or sleep in the same cabin, for more than
a few hours. This was an annoyance several times on coaches and aeroplanes,
where we were assigned random seats and the attendant had to play _Towers of
Hanoi_ to get us into the proper configuration, but also may pose a problem if
you are travelling with someone of the opposite gender.


![The train follows the path of a river](/images/DSCF6979.JPG "The vibrant
colours of the trees lining the streams that we traced were an especially
beautiful contrast to the brown and grey mountains of most of the rest of the
journey. This photo was taken from the restaurant carriage.")

Our train was one of the newer models and the cabin had air-conditioning and was
quite comfy. This was welcome for me as the night before we had gone out to
explore the city, gotten a little drunk and stupidly decided to go for the
cheapest Doener we saw. Needless to say I got food poisoning, vomited a lot in
the hotel and was green and feverish for the first night of the train journey.
One let-down for me in this unfortunate state, were the toilets. At one end of
the carriage, one could find the squat toilet and at the other end, the
western-style toilet. However, the toilet also had a bidet function which could
be turned on via a tap. Naturally someone had left this running, so after a few
hours there was no more water in the tank. This also meant that the flush
functionality of the toilet did not work. Luckily the train staff had predicted
this and a toilet brush was already supplied to shove the waste down through the
hole at the bottom of the aeroplane-style, aluminium bowl. This was all a little
grim but we had come prepared with wet-wipes, hand sanitiser and Turkish
_cologne_, which is citrus-flavoured cleaning alcohol, rather than perfume.

The carriage with our cabin was otherwise pretty good. The beds were about 2m
long and spongy enough. The loud _c-clank-a-clank_ of the wheels going over the
joins in the rails took a bit of getting used to but otherwise became comforting
after a while. The carriages did get noisy with those bumps and screeches if we
got up to speed, but in practice this wasn't really a problem as we barely went
over 30mph for most of the trip. Overall the night's sleep was restful.

![View of railway tracks from the back of the last
carriage](/images/IMG_20221106_102439.jpg "Views of the track from the back of
the train. Photos were easy to take here because you could just open the door of
the moving train and peek right out.")


I woke up the next morning with a beautiful view just beyond my feet. The blinds
in the cabin were not completely opaque so the daylight came seeping in. With
it, we saw the deep canyons that we had been traversing the night before. They
were the canyons formed by tributaries to the Tigris river and our train weaved
through deep cuts in the sides of the canyon walls, often through switch-backs
where the rest of the train would greet us as we stared out through the windows.

The scenery had a wild-west feel to it. The sandstone rocks were rich in iron
and baked in the sun, they appeared orange, a stark contrast to the deep blue,
clear sky above. Along the train, there were also telephone poles, which I liked
to imagine, were telegraph poles and that there were bandits hiding just over
yonder.

![View of canyons from the last carriage](/images/14460014.JPG "Canyons seen
from the back of the train. Taken by my travelling companion with a Holga camera
on Porta 400.")

We had finished the snacks we brought with us on the train the night before,
which meant it was time for breakfast. Unfortunately, the restaurant car was not
much to behold. The only food on offer was cup-a-soup, chocolate bars and
packaged cheese-and-factory-bread sandwiches. However, I'm not above eating junk
food so we did scoff on those in the morning. There was one packaged cake called
8Kek that tasted like banoffee pie, which was particularly delicious. The
packaged bread-roll with cheese tasted exactly like something served on an
aeroplane, so not great. But it was a good detox to the constant kebab and
_baklava_ that we had been eating in Ankara the days before. I was slightly
disappointed by the tea and coffee though. It was just Lipton tea bags and the
coffee Nescafe!

_Your correspondent_ did also meet another correspondent in the restaurant
carriage, who was a freelance writer for _Al Jazeera_. He was travelling from
Istanbul to Trabzon with his Polish girlfriend, who also dabbled in a bit of
film photography, like us, during the train journey. Luckily the guy also spoke
Turkish, as although he was Egyptian, he had lived in Istanbul for some time.
This helped as it gave us some more backstory to the country and allowed us to
chat with some of the locals who were also on the train. For example, it turned
out that our conductor was also a minor celebrity on the railways: He was a
seasoned veteran who had been conducting the Dogu Express for many years and is
even the subject of a short-film made by students; it is called _Kondüktör
(2018)_, which you can find on YouTube (no subtitles!). There were some other
travellers on the journey, but they seemed more interested in covering
hot-topics such making sure we understood their version of the events of the
Armenian Genocide.

However, disaster struck when we tried to play top-trumps with the travelling
couple in the restaurant carriage. An old lady spotted us and ratted us out to
the conductor. No gambling allowed. He further explained to us, that he knew
playing top-trumps wasn't gambling but that it's more about perception than
reality. And he wasn't going to get in trouble with his superiors over it.
Interestingly, his superiors did board the train later on. They were about 20
years younger and dressed sharply in suits, as if they were crime-scene
detectives. As far as we know, there were no murders or transgressions committed
on this express though.

![View onto the blue and grey plains of the Armenian
highlands](/images/DSCF7009.JPG "In the final few hours of the journey, we
started to see the mountains in the Armenian Highlands in the east of Turkey.")

Before long, it was late evening again. Only in the last few hours of the trip,
did we start to become bored and we spent the time by watching films in the
cabin as we watched the evening set in over the plains in the Armenian
Highlands, were no trees grew but was instead just monotonous and slightly
undulating, grey terrain. We arrived a couple of hours late in Kars, at around
10PM. It was already dark and about -5C. We had prepared our bags long in
advance and when the train stopped, we hopped out, into the sooty,
high-altitude, mountain air of Kars, ready to continue on the next leg of the
journey...

