---
title: Barskoon Valley
author: Dan Vonk
tags: personal, travel
---

![The dirt road of Barskoon Valley](/images/DSCF7947.JPG "The smooth and fast
road leading into Barskoon Valley.")

On my recent trip to Kyrgyzstan, one of the highlights was the beautiful
Barskoon Valley. On the south shore of Lake Issyk-Kul, sits the town of Barskoon
and this road brings you up into the Tien-Shan mountains and beyond. Somewhat
unusual for Kyrgyzstan, is that this road doesn't totally suck! We managed to do
about 90 km/h in our UAZ on this dirt track, while we could only manage about 20
km/h when we were travelling in the south of the country around Naryn.


<!--more-->

The reason for this, is that it is maintained by the company responsible for
operating the open-pit _Kumtor Gold Mine_ on the other side of the mountains.
Keeping to the touristy area around in the valley, we saw no other signs of it.
However, this is one of the largest gold mines in the world and is responsible
for about 8% of the country's entire GDP. In fact, the country also has large
reserves of copper, silver and mercury due to its location on the Tien-Shan
Metallogenic Belt. This particular mine has been controversial for a long time,
with it spilling cyanide and other pollutants into the water supply and
ultimately Issyk-Kul. It's always difficult to judge these situations, as the
mine does provide a large amount of revenue and it's clear that the country is
not going to develop tertiary industry and become the next Switzerland any time
soon.

![Snowy mountain visible at the end of the valley](/images/DSCF7975.JPG "View
from the famous waterfall and favourite spot of Yuri Gagarin.")

Also noteworthy of the valley is that after Yuri Gagarin became the first man in
space, he was presumably pretty worn out and vacationed in this valley when he
came back. There is a statue here dedicated to him but I don't have a picture of
it!

