---
title: Escaping the Tourist Hordes of Venice
author: Dan Vonk
tags: travel, personal
---

![View of the Grand Canal in Winter](/images/DSCF8457.JPG "The gloomy weather in
February keeps all but the most keen tourists away.")

I've long been putting off visiting Venice as it has a reputation of being one
of the most touristy places on Earth. It's known as a place where the streets
are clogged with Chinese and American group tours and everything is absurdly
expensive to match. Then there's the government's response to the
overtourism--fleece the tourists even more. Nope, neither of those sound
particularly appealing. However, now that I live in Munich, it's pretty easy to
get a coach there and it's not only cheap, but traverses some of the most
beautiful countryside in Europe on the way there as it goes directly through the
Alps on the Brenner Pass. So clearly it was finally time to make the plunge and
visit.

<!--more-->

I stayed in Mestre, which is an industrial port city on the land-side of Venice.
Its skyline is marked by the firm Fincantieri, who have their large marine
cranes towering over the place. This firm constructs the mega cruise-ships for
Norwegian Cruise Lines and the like. So the Venice isn't just an open-air
museum, at least for now! Another suprise was how international thee employees
were as well, with many East Asians but also plenty of people from all over
Europe. This was only an advantage for me as Mestre had some great cheap
restaurants catering to them, which I frequented before and after commuting from
the Venice proper on the train.

But back to Venice: as soon as I stepped out of the train, I admitted to myself
that the tourists _are_ on to something. The city is really a feast for the eyes
and unlike anywhere I've visited before. In fact, it's probably the most
beautiful city I've ever visited. No matter if the weather is gloomy or sunny,
there is something truly unique about wandering through the meandering alleys
that squirm between or even underneath those ornate and time-worn
buildings--sometimes with your path astride the turquoise coloured canals or
sometimes them leading you astray into residential cul-de-sacs so narrow that
you can't even open your umbrella.

![View across the lagoon from St. Mark's Square](/images/DSCF8495.JPG "View
across the lagoon from St. Mark's Square")

Most of the signs in Venice lead to St. Mark's Square and after some fruitful
accidental circumnavigation of the districts, so did I. This was another
magnificent location and I found the history of Venice's maritime and democratic
history on display in the museums and palaces around the square captivating.
There was even some Empress Sisi intrigue (yuck).

![Another picture of the Grand Canal](/images/DSCF8523.JPG "Another shot of the
Grand Canal")

