---
title: "Kerala: The Malabar Coast"
author: Dan Vonk
tags: personal, travel
---

![View of the tea fields in Munnar](/images/DSCF8806.JPG "A view of the tea
fields in the Kennan Devan hills near Munnar, Kerala.")

After having experienced the hustle and bustle of Bangalore, the next plan was
to explore Kerala, a state which is located on the tropical south-western tip of
the subcontinent. On its coast it is home to vast stretches of palm tree adorned
beaches, which are flanked by rice fields criss-crossed by small canals, just as
in Venice. Going further inland, one meets the mighty _Western Ghats_ mountain
range, a high-altitude rainforest, home to elephants and tigers, which is ideal
for escaping the oppressive humidity on the coast. Politically, it is also
well-known within India for its high degree of development--it has the highest
literacy rates, life expectancy and lowest impoverishment rates in the country.
All great things. And they also love a bit of communism too it turns out.

<!--more-->

Yes, it was quite jarring to see the communists flags everywhere and when
travelling on a dusty road through the jungle, one might easily mistake the
place for Cuba. However, the topic of communism in Kerala is complex. Though
they never went for "true" communism, they did carry out extensive land reform
and institute a generous welfare state. This clearly did have some positive
outcomes: the place felt a lot more "civilised", less chaotic and far more
orderly than Karnataka. However, when speaking to locals, many of them weren't
that contented with the economic situation and indeed it was common for them
still toeleave for the more dynamic city of Bangalore (or even to work as labour
in the Gulf) while the economy of Kerala at home remains sluggish and highly
indebted.

![Hammer and sickle flag in front of a Hindu
shrine](/images/IMG_20250321_125830.jpg "Wherever you go in Kerala, you'll see a
communist flag along the roadside somewhere. The Communist Part of India (CPI)
have been in government coalitions for about half a century in Kerala.")

As a tourist, I'm not qualified to talk much more about the politics of the
place. Instead, for me, one of the main draws was the history of the state. It
is located on the _Malabar Coast_ of India and has been connected to the Silk
Road and Spice Trade since at least the first millennium BC, when Arab and
Phoenician traders would sail from the Red Sea and Persian Gulf to the coast to
trade for the spices. Later on, the Portuguese, Dutch and even French would
setup base there too and major cities such as Cochin and Calicut have
interesting relics from this early colonial past. No wonder too as the list of
spices native to the area is impressive: black pepper, cardamom, turmeric,
cinnamon and ginger to name a few. Nowadays, there are plantations in the
mountainous uplands for tea, coffee and cocoa too. If you visit, you'll surely
make a tour of one of these places.

![Beach scene in Kerala](/images/DSCF8992.JPG "The beaches of Alleppey, Kerala
are wide and still used as working beaches by fishermen.")

Indeed, escaping the coast and going into the mountains was my favourite part of
the trip. Whilst the tropical beaches look nice on photos, being there also has
its downsides! It was 35c without fail every day (and not much cooler in the
evenings) with 100% humidity and frequent thunderstorms. Also, the backwaters
(the canals) provide the ideal conditions for mosquitoes so the place is just
teeming with them.

The closest major hill station reachable from Kochi is Munnar. It's easily and
cheaply accessible by coach from Ernakulum bus station, though getting a
comfortable ride is far from guaranteed! Expect a packed bus with no ventilation
other than the open windows.

Munnar itself is touristy and you'll be swamped by auto drivers trying to sell
you voyages around the tea fields as you walk through the town. However, it's
still worth doing all of this least as you get a very scenic ride through the
rainforests and tea fields. Our driver also took us to a well-known spot for
seeing elephants and we just found them hanging out by a creek, cooling
themselves off!

![Elephants at a brook](/images/DSCF8834.JPG "A family of elephants enjoying a
bath in a creek.")

Sunrise hikes are another popular tourist activity here and it's another
money-maker for the local town: one can't just enter the national park by
themselves, one needs a guide. So with our guide, we set off at 5AM to
_Eravikulam National Park_ to climb the second highest mountain in the Ghats. It
wasn't a particularly challenging climb as the mountain was only about 2000m
high and some locals were even doing it in crocs. Nevertheless, it was worth the
early wake-up as the views were spectacular and it was a far-cry from the
mountain views at home.

![Sunrise over the mountain tops](/images/DSCF8894.JPG "We caught the sun rising
over the lesser mountains of the Ghats. As it rose over the horizon, we watched
it disperse the fog hanging low in the valleys.")

![A Rhododendron on the side of a mountain](/images/DSCF8916.JPG "A Rhododendron
(native to Nepal) hanging on to the side of the mountain.")







